Simplify and unify type checks (#2)
tschneidereit/proposal-typed-objects: explainer.md

    - [Outline](#outline)
    - [Overview](#overview)
        - [Characteristics of Struct types](#characteristics-of-struct-types)
    - [Types](#types)
    - [Value Types](#value-types)
    - [Struct Types](#struct-types)
            - [Typed field definitions](#typed-field-definitions)
            - [Struct Type references](#struct-type-references)

>             - [Struct Type forward declaration](#struct-type-forward-declaration)

Reviewer: nit: these list items aren't being rendered as I expect you intend

Author: Oh, thanks. Wrong indentation level for the sections—fixed.

## Type definitions

> The central part of the Typed Objects specification are *type definition objects*, generally called *type definitions* for short. Type definitions describe the fixed structure of a value, and are used to specify a struct type's fields' types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The central part of the Typed Objects specification are *type definition objects*, generally called *type definitions* for short. Type definitions describe the fixed structure of an instance in memory, specifying a struct type's fields' types.
```

> A type definition has an internal method `[[PerformTypeCheck]]`, which, given a value `V`, returns a new value `vResult` which is of the right type, or throws.

Reviewer: Could there be two internal methods:
* `[[Write]] : jsval &rarr; whatever`
* `[[Read]] : whatever &rarr; jsval`
?  Otherwise, as is, the `jsval` becomes the canonical representation of the typed object field and the wasm JS API spec will have an awkward time working with this directly, particularly for all the integral types.

Doing this implies that a struct intances have a `[[Value]]` internal slot which is a heterogenous array containing the `whatever` value for each of the fields.  So the getter logic for an indexed property `i` (or a named property aliasing `i`) takes the object `o`, and returns `o.[[FieldTypes]][i].[[Read]](o.[[Value]][i])` and the setter for a value `v` logic similarly does: `o.[[Value]][i] = o.[[FieldTypes]][i].[[Write]](v)`.

Reviewer: Alternatively, it might be useful to give Typed Objects a link back to their Typed Definition Object (for an immutable `.constructor` so instanceof works) and then `[[FieldTypes]] could be found via `o.[[TypeDef]].[[FieldTypes]]`.

The behavior of `[[PerformTypeCheck]]` for all types provided by this specification is described below.

Host environments can provide exotic objects with different implementations of `[[PerformTypeCheck]]`.

> ### Value type definitions

Reviewer: How about "Value Type Objects"?  "Definition" seems like it would be reserved for the compound things like struct/array-types.

Author: I went with just "Value Types", hope you agree that that works.

Reviewer: That's great, thanks!

## Type definitions

The central part of the Typed Objects specification are *type definition objects*, generally called *type definitions* for short. Type definitions describe the fixed structure of an instance in memory, specifying a struct type's fields' types.

> A type definition has the internal methods `[[Read]]` and `[[Write]]`, which convert between `Value` and internal representations for the type. `[[Write]]` additionally performs a type-specific type check.

Reviewer: I think we need to be careful to keep the concepts of *type definition* and *value type* distinct; in particular *type definition*s do not have `[[Read]]` or `[[Write]]` internal methods; rather type definitions *contain* value types and it is the *value types* that exclusively have the `[[Read]]` and `[[Write]]` methods that get invoked by the `[[Get]]` and `[[Set]]` internal methods of instances.

In particular, I'd pull the "Value Types" subsection out of this "Type Definitions" section and make "Value Types" into a full section.  There's an annoying sequencing constraint (Value Types logically comes first, but you kinda want to motivate it by introducing Type Definitions first), but I suppose it could be solved either way.

Reviewer: As a comparison, check out the "Basic Approach" section in my WIP GC JS API (is that enough acronyms for you?) draft:
https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/blob/add-js-api/proposals/gc/MVP-JS.md

Author: Good call, this was indeed just wrong. I restructured things quite a bit, and think it's much better now.

For `[[Read]]` the abstract behavior is to take in an internal representation `I`, and return an equivalent value `V`.

For `[[Write]]`, the abstract behavior is to take in a value `V` and perform type-specific steps to convert the value into an internal representation, or throw a `TypeError`.

The behavior of `[[Read]]` and `[[Write]]` for all types provided by this specification is described below.

Host environments can provide exotic objects with different implementations of `[[Read]]` and `[[Write]]`.

### Value Types

The following common value type definitions are provided by this spec:

    uint8  int8          any
    uint16 int16         string
    uint32 int32 float32 object
    uint64 int64 float64 ref

> These value types provide implementations of the `[[Read]]` and `[[Write]]` internal methods. Calling the value type as a function executes the steps of the internal `[[Write]]` method.

Reviewer: Since `[[Write]]` has the abstract signature `jsval` &rarr; `T` and `[[Read]]` has `T` &rarr; `jsval`, I think we should say that calling a value type as a function (which needs to have signature `jsval` &rarr; `jsval`) executes `[[Read]]([[Write]](v))`.

    uint32 int32 float32 object

>     uint64 int64 float64

Reviewer: How about removing the intro sentence and say instead: "The following common value type definitions are provided by the JS spec" and then include `ref` in the list, explaining it later.  Reason being: `Struct` is a type definition, not a value type

> These types provide implementations of the `[[PerformTypeCheck]]` internal method. Calling the type as a function executes the steps of the internal method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These value types provide implementations of the `[[PerformTypeCheck]]` internal method. Calling the value type as a function executes the steps of the internal method.
```

object(null)  // returns null
```

> For [`ref`](#struct-type-references), the same kind of type check without coercion is performed, but the exact kind of check depends on the type. This specification provides a [definition of one type system](#type-checking-for-struct-type-references), but host environments can add additional type systems.

Reviewer: Could we introduce `ref` above as `ref(T)` so that here we could say "the same kind of type check without coercion is performed, but additionally the object is required to match `T`, in a manner described below".  Also, "host environments can add additional type systems" sounds pretty open-ended and scary (type systems don't usually compose).  Instead of making this general point in the context of `ref` and saying "type system", I'd just say "Host environments can define additional value types" as part of the general Value Types introduction.

Author: Indeed, that does sound scary, now that I think about it :) Changed pretty much like you suggested.

A typed field definition is an `object` definining the characteristics of a `Struct`'s typed field. It has the following members:
 - `type` - A [type definition](#type-definition), specifying the field's type.
 - `name` [optional] - A `string` or `symbol` used as an optional name for the field. If given, an accessor is created that allows reading and, if the field is writable, writing the field using a name in addition to its index.
 - `readonly` [optional] - A `boolean`. If `true`, the field can only be set via the type's constructor and is immutable afterwards.

> #### Struct type references

Reviewer: Technically, these references can refer to both struct, array (and in the future, function) definitions, so maybe just call them "Reference value types"?

Author: We currently don't have array or function type definitions. I'd prefer to only make this language general once we can actually make use of that generality—otherwise I fear it might just be confusing. In particular, I think the first paragraph would have to be quite a bit more complex, without a clear reason for why.

I added a paragraph explaining that additional reference value types are possible.

Reviewer: Ah, I actually hadn't noticed that array types weren't present.  Makes sense, thanks!

## Struct type details

Struct types are specified as a new kind of [Built-in Exotic Object](https://tc39.github.io/ecma262/#sec-built-in-exotic-object-internal-methods-and-slots). They override some internal methods, much like [Integer-Indexed Exotic Objects](https://tc39.github.io/ecma262/#sec-integer-indexed-exotic-objects) do.

### Memory layout

Struct type objects have the following internal slots:
- `[[FieldTypes]]` — A list containing references to each of the type's field's types.

Struct type instance objects have the following internal slots:
- `[[StructType]]` — An immutable reference to the instance's type.

> - `[[Values]]` — A buffer containing byte representation of the values stored in the instance's fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `[[Values]]` — A list of the abstract values for all the fields produce by the fields' associated Value Type `[[Write]]` method
```

Struct type instance objects have the following internal slots:
- `[[StructType]]` — An immutable reference to the instance's type.
- `[[Values]]` — A buffer containing byte representation of the values stored in the instance's fields.

For the `Struct` type itself, `[[FieldTypes]]` is set to an empty list.

### Typed fields

Struct types have their property-access related internal methods overridden to perform type checking and coercion, based on the internal slots described above.

#### Reading from typed fields

Reading from a typed field returns the result of converting the internal representation of the field's contents to a value representation, using the field's type's `[[Read]]` method.

In slightly more detail, a `[[Get]]` operation on a struct type instance `O` with property key `P`, and receiver `receiver` performs the following steps:
  1. If [Type](https://tc39.github.io/ecma262/#sec-ecmascript-data-types-and-values)(P) is `String`, then
      1. Let `numericIndex` be ! [CanonicalNumericIndexString](https://tc39.github.io/ecma262/#sec-canonicalnumericindexstring)(P) .
      2. If `numericIndex` is not *undefined*, then

>           1. Let `fieldType` be `O.[[StructType]].[[FieldTypes]].[[numericIndex]]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          1. Let `fieldType` be `O.[[StructType]].[[FieldTypes]][numericIndex]`.
```

>           2. Let `TV` be `O.[[Values]].[[numericIndex]]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          2. Let `TV` be `O.[[Values]][numericIndex]`.
```

          3. Return ! `fieldType.[[Read]](TV)`.
  2. Return ? [OrdinaryGet](https://tc39.github.io/ecma262/#sec-ordinaryget)(O, P, Receiver).

#### Writing to typed fields

Writing to a typed field stores the result of converting the given value `V` to an internal representation as the field's contents, using the field's type's `[[Write]]` method.

In slightly more detail, a `[[Set]]` operation on a struct type instance `O` with property key `P`, value `V`, and receiver `receiver` performs the following steps:
  1. If [Type](https://tc39.github.io/ecma262/#sec-ecmascript-data-types-and-values)(P) is `String`, then
      1. Let `numericIndex` be ! [CanonicalNumericIndexString](https://tc39.github.io/ecma262/#sec-canonicalnumericindexstring)(P) .
      2. If `numericIndex` is not *undefined*, then

>           1. Let `fieldType` be `O.[[StructType]].[[FieldTypes]].[[numericIndex]]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          1. Let `fieldType` be `O.[[StructType]].[[FieldTypes]][numericIndex]`.
```

          2. Let `TV` be ? `fieldType.[[Write]](V)`.

>           3. Set `O.[[Values]].[[numericIndex]]` to `TV`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          3. Set `O.[[Values]][numericIndex]` to `TV`.
```

#### Writing to typed fields

> When writing to a typed field, the steps of the field's type's internal method `[[PerformTypeCheck]]` are executed. If the internal method completes successfully, the resulting value is stored in the field. This specification provides implementations of this internal method for [value types](#value-type-definitions) and for [struct type references](#type-checking-for-struct-type-references).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When writing to a typed field, the steps of the field's type's internal method `[[PerformTypeCheck]]` are executed. If the internal method completes successfully, the resulting value is stored in the field. This specification provides implementations of this internal method for all the [builtin value types](#value-type-definitions).
```
